our teeth can be kind of a pain but
luckily
it's 2020. we can fix them keep them
clean
and get rid of a toothache with one
visit to the dentist
but imagine life thousands of years ago
no toothpaste
no floss not even toothbrushes or
mouthwash
their teeth must have been terrible or
not those dentist words cavities plaque
they didn't exist back then let's get in
our bright side time machine
and go back a bit a human perfect
he's eating tough meat cracking open
nuts
chewing some tasty tree bark he's the
proud owner of the hardest and most
durable part of the body
ever created teeth these powerful tools
help them survive in wild and harsh
conditions
they're not indestructible but their
unique structure
is hard to beat there's dentin inside a
tooth
a flexible but strong substance it's
covered with enamel
the most durable element in the human
body mostly made of calcium
now imagine a single dry spaghetti
pretty easy to break right
now try to break thousands of them at
the same time
now imagine that spaghetti inside your
teeth
this time the bundle of spaghettis
called a prism
and there are loads of them they form
strong fibers that intertwine with each
other
twist and create a perfect strong tooth
let's watch our ancestor eat he's
getting a workout
the meat he's eating keeps his teeth
strong and all that chewing and
swallowing
takes care of any harmful bacteria his
jaws getting
stronger every day his teeth can handle
anything
chew anything now let's get back to the
future
okay back in 2020 the same world-class
all-powerful teeth are chewing soft
patties
crunchy warm rolls sushi pizza
you get the picture that stuff's worse
for your teeth than
anything your ancestors were eating jaws
don't need to munch so intensely anymore
teeth don't really do any heavy lifting
and it's made them
way weaker we've never had such a soft
diet
but that's actually not the main problem
it's what's in our food that's letting
us down
when we eat modern foods rich in carbs
or sugars
we help bad bacteria grow in our mouth
that can cause cavities
plaque and all that nasty stuff the
strongest material in the human body
is being defeated by soft sweet food
back in the day our ancestors had to
hunt mammoths and other wild animals
they had to walk for miles looking for
roots berries herbs
even climbed trees to get honey those
guys were ripped
and they burned a lot of calories every
day
what's the max time you spend in a gym
maybe
two hours training in the gym is nothing
compared to the kind of stuff that they
were doing back then
extra calories accumulate and can upset
your stomach
when you eat too much gases and acids
from your intestines can get
into your oral cavity and help destroy
your teeth
back then people's jaws worked harder
and they grew
strong there was more space between
their teeth
no one was having their wisdom teeth out
at least i hope not
wisdom teeth fit fine into their bigger
jaws
now just like when i don't work out for
a while
our jaws don't get a workout and they
get smaller and wimpier
our teeth don't fit anymore we have to
have them pulled out
or moved around great time to be a
dentist though ka-ching
animals eat and use their teeth just
like they did thousands of years ago
so they don't have the same problem many
indigenous peoples
still living far from civilization are
perfect proof
they don't have the same tooth problems
as their more modern living brothers and
sisters
they eat way less sugar and processed
foods
let's do a whirlwind factor tooth
addition
teeth are not bones they can't regrow
can't heal themselves and they don't
have marrow in the middle
our teeth are a little like icebergs
only two-thirds of each tooth is visible
the rest is hidden inside your gums
that's why you gotta take care of them
too
rats have really strange teeth that
never stop
growing that's why rats are always
chewing on weird stuff
they're not hungry they're just trying
to grind their teeth down to size
there are a whole bunch of things in our
body that are secretly awesome
just like our trusty teeth teeth and
saliva
the perfect food wrestling tag team you
can't even taste food with a dry tongue
thanks saliva let's get back to the
match in the red corner
weighing in at well whenever a slice of
pizza weighs
the double p pepperoni pizza
and in the blue corner the tag team
phenomenon
your teeth and saliva look at the teeth
go
grinding biting munching teeth tags off
to saliva who floods the arena and uses
its special enzymes to break that pizza
up
oh pizza's down the ref is there oh it's
all over
saliva helps clean teeth and then
disappears into the locker room
okay your throat your mouth produces
about as much saliva per day
as a big bottle of soda most of it gets
swallowed into your stomach
where it keeps helping to break food up
on another topic
we wash our ears to get rid of it but
ear wax
is vital for the body your eardrum is a
sensitive organ
if a small particle of dust fell on it
you'd hear a loud crash
enter earwax and ear hair together
they protect your eardrum from dust and
water but that's not all
earwax contains a substance that fights
bad bacteria
and infections another one of those
pesky things we actually really need
is sweat when we get hot but there's no
shower around to jump into our body
cools itself with sweat
it's mainly just water and it doesn't
really smell of anything
but when it mixes with bacteria on your
body that's when things can get a bit
spicy when you're nervous you make a
different kind of sweat
that's how smart your body is according
to one theory
this sweat developed to help you do one
really specific thing
let's go back a million years to
understand how it works
time machine time
you're an ancient descendant of a modern
human you're out hunting
and you come face to face with a
saber-toothed tiger
your body releases sweat and your palms
become moist
sweet now it's much easier to climb a
tree and get out of danger
it's like reading a book it's easier to
turn the pages when your fingers are a
bit wet
so next time you're in front of a bunch
of people or getting ready for an exam
don't fret if you start to sweat your
body's just trying to protect you
even if there are no tigers around or
trees
nails help us peel off stickers open
those grocery bags at the store
and annoy our friends with some groovy
non-stop tap tap tapping
but the most important thing they do is
help us feel
how hard something is if you didn't have
rigid nails on your fingers
you wouldn't really be able to tell try
it
touch your cheekbone with your finger
now touch something hard like a table
can you really feel a big difference or
can you only really feel your finger
squishing up against something so we
know
that bones and teeth are strong but
there's another material in your body
that's way stronger than you might think
you have over 150 000 of them
your hair you can easily break one just
pinch it and it splits into two but if
you banded your hair together
it could take the weight of half a
school bus
saliva moistens your tongue and in just
the same way
tears moisten your eyes they protect
them from small
bugs dust smoke and even infection
you actually always have tears in your
eyes called basil tears
they're just there to keep your eye
healthy
if you walk near a fire or something you
get what they call
reflex tears and when you watch a dog
and a cat cuddling on some tick tock
video
you get emotional tears and don't worry
if you cry a lot
good news humans never run out of tears
all this great stuff but it's all kind
of pointless without our senses
sight smell hearing touch those are the
basics
but there are a few more one sense tells
you where your body is in space
like your legs under the table you can't
see them
but you know where they are it's also
how we can touch our
nose with our eyes closed or climb the
stairs without looking at every single
step